7 Related Work

Promptable and Interactive Visual Segmentation. SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) introduces “promptable” image segmentation with interactive refinement. While the original task definition included text prompts, they were not fully developed. SAM 2 (Ravi et al., 2024) extended the promptable visual segmentation task to video, allowing refinement points on any frame. SAM 3 inherits geometry-based segmentation while extending to include text and image exemplar prompts to segment all instances of a concept in images and videos.

Open-Vocabulary Detection and Segmentation in Images exhaustively labels every instance of an open-vocabulary object category with a coarse bounding box (detection) or a fine-grained pixel mask (segmentation). Recent open-vocabulary (OV) detection (Gu et al., 2021; Minderer et al., 2022) and segmentation (Ding et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2023) methods leverage large-scale vision-language encoders such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) to handle categories described by arbitrary text, even those never seen during training. While DETR (Carion et al., 2020) is limited to a closed set of categories seen during training, MDETR (Kamath et al., 2021) evolves the approach to condition on raw text queries. Image exemplars used as prompts to specify the desired object category (e.g., DINOv (Li et al., 2023a), T-Rex2 (Jiang et al., 2024)) present a practical alternative to text, but fall short in conveying the abstract concept of objects as effectively as text prompts. We introduce a new benchmark for OV segmentation with > 100× more unique concepts than prior work.

Visual Grounding localizes a language expression referring to a region of the image with a box or mask. (Plummer et al., 2020) introduces phrase detection as both deciding whether the phrase is relevant to an image and localizing it. GLIP (Li et al., 2022b) and GroundingDino (Liu et al., 2023) formulate object detection as phrase grounding, unifying both tasks during training. MQ-GLIP (Xu et al., 2023) adds image exemplars to text as queries. Building on this trend toward models supporting multiple tasks and modalities, GLEE (Wu et al., 2024a) allows text phrases, referring expressions, and visual prompts for category and instance grounding in both images and videos. Unlike SAM 3, GLEE does not support exemplars or interactive refinement. LISA (Lai et al., 2024) allows segmentation that requires reasoning, while OMG-LLaVa (Zhang et al., 2024a) and GLaMM (Rasheed et al., 2024) generate natural language responses interleaved with corresponding segmentation masks, with GLaMM accepting both textual and optional image prompts as input. Some general-purpose MLLMs can output boxes and masks (Gemini2.5 (Comanici et al., 2025)) or points (Molmo (Deitke et al., 2025)). SAM 3 can be used as a “vision tool” in combination with an MLLM (§6).

Multi-Object Tracking and Segmentation methods identify object instances in video and track them, associating each with a unique ID. In tracking-by-detection methods, detection is performed independently on each frame to produce boxes and confidence scores, followed by association of boxes using motion-based and appearance-based matching as in SORT (Bewley et al., 2016; Wojke et al., 2017), Tracktor (Bergmann et al., 2019), ByteTrack (Zhang et al., 2022c), SAM2MOT (Jiang et al., 2025), or OC-SORT (Cao et al., 2023). An alternative is an end-to-end trainable architecture that jointly detects and associates objects, e.g., TrackFormer (Meinhardt et al., 2022), TransTrack (Sun et al., 2020), or MOTR (Zeng et al., 2022). TrackFormer uses a DETR-like encoder-decoder that initializes new tracks from static object queries and auto-regressively follows existing tracks with identity-preserving track queries. A challenge with joint models is the conflict between detection and tracking (Feichtenhofer et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2023a), where one needs to focus on semantics while the other on disentangling identities, even if their spatial locations overlap over time. SAM 3 is a strong image detector tightly integrated into a tracker to segment concepts in videos.

8 Conclusion

We present Segment Anything with *Concepts*, enabling open-vocabulary text and image exemplars as prompts in interactive segmentation. Our principal contributions are: (i) introducing the PCS task and SA-Co benchmark, (ii) an architecture that decouples recognition, localization and tracking and extends SAM 2 to solve concept segmentation while retaining visual segmentation capabilities, (iii) a high-quality, efficient data engine that leverages the complementary strengths of human and AI annotators. SAM 3 achieves state-of-the-art results, doubling performance over prior systems for PCS on SA-Co in images and videos. That said, our model has several limitations. For example, it struggles to generalize to out-of-domain terms, which could be mitigated by automatic domain expansion but requires extra training. We discuss this and other limitations of our model in §B. We believe SAM 3 and the SA-Co benchmark will be important milestones and pave the way for future research and applications in computer vision.